design-patterns/creational/prototype/README.md, before:

# Prototype Design Pattern

The Prototype pattern, first introduced in the seminal "Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software" book by the Gang of Four in 1994, is a creational design pattern that enables object creation by cloning an existing object, known as the prototype. This pattern emerged from the need to create new objects without tightly coupling the client code to specific classes, and to avoid the computational overhead of creating objects from scratch. The pattern was inspired by biological processes where cells divide to produce copies, and it brings this concept into software engineering. Historically, the pattern gained prominence in frameworks requiring runtime object composition, particularly in graphical editing systems where users could clone existing shapes and modifications.

## Use Cases and Problem Solutions

The Prototype pattern effectively addresses several common software design challenges. In systems where object creation is resource-intensive (like loading large datasets or establishing database connections), cloning existing objects can significantly improve performance. It's particularly valuable in scenarios where applications need to create objects at runtime without knowing their exact classes, such as dynamic loading or plugin architectures. The pattern also shines in situations where objects can exist in a limited number of different states - instead of creating new objects and setting up their state, you can clone pre-configured prototypes.

Common problems solved include:
- Reducing the overhead of creating complex objects
- Creating objects without coupling to their concrete classes
- Creating objects based on dynamic conditions
- Producing copies of composite objects or objects with circular references
- Implementing undo/redo functionality in applications

## Examples and Implementation

### Basic Implementation
```cpp
class Prototype {
    public:
        virtual Prototype* clone() = 0;
};

class ConcretePrototype : public Prototype {
    public:
        Prototype* clone() override {
            return new ConcretePrototype(*this);
        }
};
```

### Advanced Usage with Registry
```cpp
class PrototypeRegistry {
    private:
        std::unordered_map<std::string, std::unique_ptr<Prototype>> prototypes;
    public:
        void registerPrototype(const std::string& key, std::unique_ptr<Prototype> p) {
            prototypes[key] = std::move(p);
        }
        
        std::unique_ptr<Prototype> createPrototype(const std::string& key) {
            if (prototypes.count(key) > 0) {
                return std::unique_ptr<Prototype>(prototypes[key]->clone());
            }
            return nullptr;
        }
};
```

## Advantages
- Reduces subclassing by letting clients clone prototypes instead of instantiating specific classes
- Adds/removes products at runtime
- Specifies new objects by varying values
- Reduces the need for complex initialization code
- Provides alternative to class hierarchies of factories

## Disadvantages
- Each concrete prototype must implement the clone operation
- Complex objects with circular references might be challenging to clone
- Deep copying of complex objects can be computationally expensive
- Managing prototype registry can add complexity

## Pattern Variations
1. **Shallow Copy Prototype**: Creates new objects by copying only the immediate fields
2. **Deep Copy Prototype**: Creates new objects by recursively copying all referenced objects
3. **Registry Prototype**: Maintains a registry of available prototypes
4. **Clone Factory**: Combines Factory and Prototype patterns

## Real-World Examples
1. **Document Editors**: Cloning existing document templates
2. **Game Development**: Creating multiple instances of similar game objects
3. **CAD Systems**: Duplicating complex geometric shapes
4. **UI Component Libraries**: Cloning widget prototypes

## Books and Resources

1. "Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software" (1994)
    - Authors: Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, John Vlissides
    - Contains the original definition and implementation

2. "Head First Design Patterns" (2004)
    - Authors: Eric Freeman, Elisabeth Robson
    - Provides practical examples and visual explanations

3. "Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship" (2008)
    - Author: Robert C. Martin
    - Discusses pattern implementation with clean code principles

4. "Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture" (2002)
    - Author: Martin Fowler
    - Shows prototype pattern usage in enterprise applications

## Best Practices

1. Use smart pointers for memory management
2. Implement both shallow and deep copy where appropriate
3. Consider thread safety in multi-threaded applications
4. Document cloning behavior clearly
5. Use prototype registry for managing multiple prototypes
6. Implement proper copy constructors and assignment operators
7. Consider serialization for complex object cloning
8. Add validation in clone methods
9. Use factory methods with prototype pattern when appropriate
10. Keep prototype interface simple

## Common Pitfalls

1. Incorrect handling of deep vs shallow copying
2. Memory leaks in clone implementation
3. Not considering thread safety
4. Overcomplicating the prototype interface
5. Ignoring performance implications of deep copying
6. Not properly handling null or invalid prototypes
7. Circular reference issues in deep copying
8. Inconsistent cloning behavior
9. Poor error handling in clone operations
10. Overuse of the pattern where simple construction would suffice

## License

This code is provided under the MIT License. Feel free to use, modify, and distribute as needed.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

Commit message:

improving general comment in code regarding the prototype pattern, calling out critical warning regarding object slicing

design-patterns/creational/prototype/README.md, after:

# Prototype Design Pattern

The Prototype pattern, first introduced in the seminal "Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software" book by the Gang of Four in 1994, is a creational design pattern that enables object creation by cloning an existing object, known as the prototype. This pattern emerged from the need to create new objects without tightly coupling the client code to specific classes, and to avoid the computational overhead of creating objects from scratch. The pattern was inspired by biological processes where cells divide to produce copies, and it brings this concept into software engineering. Historically, the pattern gained prominence in frameworks requiring runtime object composition, particularly in graphical editing systems where users could clone existing shapes and modifications.

## Use Cases and Problem Solutions

The Prototype pattern effectively addresses several common software design challenges. In systems where object creation is resource-intensive (like loading large datasets or establishing database connections), cloning existing objects can significantly improve performance. It's particularly valuable in scenarios where applications need to create objects at runtime without knowing their exact classes, such as dynamic loading or plugin architectures. The pattern also shines in situations where objects can exist in a limited number of different states - instead of creating new objects and setting up their state, you can clone pre-configured prototypes.

Common problems solved include:
- Reducing the overhead of creating complex objects
- Creating objects without coupling to their concrete classes
- Creating objects based on dynamic conditions
- Producing copies of composite objects or objects with circular references
- Implementing undo/redo functionality in applications

## Examples and Implementation

### Basic Implementation
```cpp
class Prototype {
    public:
        virtual Prototype* clone() = 0;
};

class ConcretePrototype : public Prototype {
    public:
        Prototype* clone() override {
            return new ConcretePrototype(*this);
        }
};
```

### Advanced Usage with Registry
```cpp
class PrototypeRegistry {
    private:
        std::unordered_map<std::string, std::unique_ptr<Prototype>> prototypes;
    public:
        void registerPrototype(const std::string& key, std::unique_ptr<Prototype> p) {
            prototypes[key] = std::move(p);
        }
        
        std::unique_ptr<Prototype> createPrototype(const std::string& key) {
            if (prototypes.count(key) > 0) {
                return std::unique_ptr<Prototype>(prototypes[key]->clone());
            }
            return nullptr;
        }
};
```

## Advantages
- Reduces subclassing by letting clients clone prototypes instead of instantiating specific classes
- Adds/removes products at runtime
- Specifies new objects by varying values
- Reduces the need for complex initialization code
- Provides alternative to class hierarchies of factories

## Disadvantages
- Each concrete prototype must implement the clone operation
- Complex objects with circular references might be challenging to clone
- Deep copying of complex objects can be computationally expensive
- Managing prototype registry can add complexity

## Critical warning - object slicing:
When passing derived objects by value instead of by pointer/reference,  the derived portion of the object gets "sliced off", leaving only the base class portion. example:
```cpp
   class Base { int x; };
   class Derived : public Base { int y; };
   void func(Base val) { ... }  // slicing occurs here
   Derived d;
   func(d);  // only Base::x is copied, Derived::y is lost
```

## Pattern Variations
1. **Shallow Copy Prototype**: Creates new objects by copying only the immediate fields
2. **Deep Copy Prototype**: Creates new objects by recursively copying all referenced objects
3. **Registry Prototype**: Maintains a registry of available prototypes
4. **Clone Factory**: Combines Factory and Prototype patterns

## Real-World Examples
1. **Document Editors**: Cloning existing document templates
2. **Game Development**: Creating multiple instances of similar game objects
3. **CAD Systems**: Duplicating complex geometric shapes
4. **UI Component Libraries**: Cloning widget prototypes

## Books and Resources

1. "Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software" (1994)
    - Authors: Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, John Vlissides
    - Contains the original definition and implementation

2. "Head First Design Patterns" (2004)
    - Authors: Eric Freeman, Elisabeth Robson
    - Provides practical examples and visual explanations

3. "Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship" (2008)
    - Author: Robert C. Martin
    - Discusses pattern implementation with clean code principles

4. "Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture" (2002)
    - Author: Martin Fowler
    - Shows prototype pattern usage in enterprise applications

## Best Practices

1. Use smart pointers for memory management
2. Implement both shallow and deep copy where appropriate
3. Consider thread safety in multi-threaded applications
4. Document cloning behavior clearly
5. Use prototype registry for managing multiple prototypes
6. Implement proper copy constructors and assignment operators
7. Consider serialization for complex object cloning
8. Add validation in clone methods
9. Use factory methods with prototype pattern when appropriate
10. Keep prototype interface simple

## Common Pitfalls

1. Incorrect handling of deep vs shallow copying
2. Memory leaks in clone implementation
3. Not considering thread safety
4. Overcomplicating the prototype interface
5. Ignoring performance implications of deep copying
6. Not properly handling null or invalid prototypes
7. Circular reference issues in deep copying
8. Inconsistent cloning behavior
9. Poor error handling in clone operations
10. Overuse of the pattern where simple construction would suffice

## License

This code is provided under the MIT License. Feel free to use, modify, and distribute as needed.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.
